## Guile interoperability tests

The purpose of this test was to check the capabilities of Guile for embedding and extending and understand if it's fit for some ideas I have in mind.

In order to better understand what the language is capable of and spot critical areas, I have created a basic Python C/API integration.

The test proved successful, and now the code in this repo can:

- bootstrap most of the C code required to implement (many, not all) C Python API functions
- build a `python-guile.so` library that exposes the low-level Python API to Guile
- show how to leverage the power of LISP to provide higher level abstractions (see a small example in `high-level.scm`)

### Disclaimer

I'm a complete n00b about Guile and Scheme in general, this being the first serious stab at using it. 

I know a bit of Emacs Lisp, a bit of Clojure and that's it. I hope it will do, but if you see strange stuff in the code, don't be surprised.

## Requirements

You need Guile-2.2 with all development packages installed, on my Ubuntu machine this means having the following packages:

    guile-2.2
    guile-2.2-dev
    guile-2.2-libs
    
and a recent version of Python 3 (>= 3.2) with the development and shared libraries installed.

If you want to benefit from the compilation script you will need:

    GNU Make
    GCC
    pkg-config

but if you know what you are doing you can probably use whatever and chain preprocessor and library options on your own.

## Usage

Type `make` to compile everything and run the `python-demo.scm` script.

If the execution is successful, you will end up with the message:

    The result of the script execution is: 5.0

While the actual result will probably not blow you away, what's under the cover may.

You just executed a (simple) Python script in a Python 3 interpreter using Scheme, all with in-memory/low-latency communication.

## What's here

There is a `python` module which, when loaded, provides a number of functions and constants. 

The list of functions currently includes:
    
    py-initialize
    py-finalize
    pylong-from-long-long
    pyfloat-from-double
    pyeval-get-builtins
    pyeval-eval-code
    pyfloat-as-double
    pylong-as-long-long
    py-compile-string
    pydict-new
    pydict-copy
    pydict-set-item-string
    pydict-get-item-string
    pydict-get-item
    pydict-del-item
    pydict-del-item-string
    pydict-clear
    pytuple-new
    pytuple-get-item
    pytuple-set-item
    py-incref
    py-decref
    pyimport-add-module
    pymodule-get-dict

where only the following constants are exported

    py-file-input
    py-eval-input
    py-single-input
    
All C code required for the Guile C wrapping around the Python API is automatically generated by Guile itself by adding entries to the `template.scm` file and using the `meta-create-c-binding.scm` script on it (see the `Makefile` for details).

`meta-create-c-binding.scm` reads a list of Python C/API definitions from a text file and generates the appropriate dynamic code, which is then included in the C module code.

I know: SWIG can do all this already, but I still think it's cool because Guile is sort of bootstrapping itself.

## Bugs

There is little to no testing for most of the code, mostly due to the fact it's the first real Guile code I write. I have created the small `test-libpython.scm` to cope with this limitation during development, though (it is a form of testing, although a poor's man one).

The code generation module `meta-create-c-binding.scm` has an hideous name and doesn't support all possible combination of arguments, most notably it doesn't support Python objects handlers required to support most `PyErr_` functions.

More a feature than a bug, the Python/Guile interface is based on the low-level version of the Python API functions. This means it has the same reference counting quirks, and plays very poorly with GC without proper high level wrapping (see `high-level.scm`)

## License

This software is distributed under the GNU General Public License v2.

The code can be used in any non-profit software, with attribution.

Commercial use is reserved.

Regardless of the usage, no warranty whatsoever is provided.


